---
layout: post
title: Exploratory Data Analysis: MTA Turnstile Data

---

*an overview of my first data analysis project on MTA Turnstile Data.

-----

### Project Scope

For this project, we were presenting to a group advocating for women in tech. Our task was to find the optimal placement for street teams to generate ticket sales for their annual gala.

To complete this project, we used Python, Numpy, and Pandas as well as Matplotlib, Folium and Seaborn for visualization. We decided to look at the 6 weeks worth of historic data prior to the gala month. We believed this would be the best time frame because it will be fresh in people's memory when the gala date comes up in June.


### Data Cleaning

With 377 subway stations and hundreds of thousands of rows of data, we knew we wanted to narrow our focus. Our first objective when looking at the data was to choose our metrics. We used:

* Subway station
* Date
* Time
* Delta entry
* Weekday

In our initial inspection of the data, we found that there some significant outliers. One way to eliminate these outliers was using the category column to remove all 'reset' values. These reset values disrupted the counts of the entries. We solved this by creating a new metris: Delta entry. We did this by grouping the data by station and day and subtracting the number of entries from the previous row. This gave us the change in number of entries between rows.

### Methodology 

Our team decided that the way we were going to choose the best stations was by high traffic and proximity to tech companies and women's health centers. 

We used pandas to group the data by station and sort by our custom Delta Entry column. From the top 30 stations by traffic, we plotted these on a map using their latitude and longitude. This was possible because of the Folium package. From this visual, we quickly saw the concentration of Manhattan traffic.

Next, we plotted 20 of Manhattan's tech companies as well as 15 women's health centers. Visualizing these on the map helped us to narrow down our station selection from 30 stations to just the top 10 that overlapped with these high-interest locations.

Great. We have our chosen stations. From there we still needed to identify the best days and times for street teams.

We grouped our chosen stations by weekday and sorted by Delta Entries. As shown in the resulting graph below, the peak days are Wednesday, Thursday and Tuesday.

Finally, we sorted the chosen stations by hour of the day and the number of entries. This showed us that the peak traffic windows were between 12 - 4pm and 4pm to 8pm.

### Results & Recommendations

In our final presentation to the organization, we revealed our recommendations:

* 34th St. - Penn Station
* Grand Central - 42 St.
* 34th St. - Herald Square
* 23rd St.
* 14th St. - Union Square
* Fulton St.
* 42nd St. Port Authority
* Times Square - 42nd St.
* 86th St.
* 125th St.

-----

Learn more and see our code on [GitHub]({{ site.github.repo }}).
